Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Gordon R. Dickson is one of the all-time
professionals in science fiction. He's been writing this stuff full-time for
over 30 years. Besides an uncountable number of short stories, he's published
such novels as Dorsai, The Pritcher Mass, The Dragon and the George, and The Star
Sailors. He's also won Hugo and Nebula awards for his science fiction, and he
served as president of the Science Fiction Writers of America. We asked Dickson if
he had always been a full-time writer.
Yeah.
I went effectively out of... I just started at the beginning.
I didn't really know anything about a writer, actually.
I entered the University of Minnesota in 1939 when I was 15 years old, and began to work
toward a degree with a major in creative writing.
and World War II came along before I was able to get my B.A. So I was out for
three or four years, I forget which, something like that. Then I went back and
spent another two years, went into graduate school. At the time, it's about the
only time in my life when I ever considered doing anything but writing. I was
playing with the idea then of holding down a teaching job, going on and getting
my doctorate in English and teaching, and doing the writing on the side. After
World War II, we were all hypersensible. Everybody was very cool-headed, and
let's have this nonsense over with. Get down and get to work someplace. And
luckily, I came out of that and said, this is silly. I never intended to do
anything but writing. And instead of having the teaching pay for the writing,
why not make the writing pay for the writing? So I simply dived out of graduate
school into full-time writing for the magazines.
Dickson published his first story in a science fiction magazine around 1950, and
by writing for the pulps, he was able to support himself. So actually, I dived
in and kept myself in place writing for the magazines for about three or four
years. And then I, somewhere about 1954, I did my first science fiction novel.
So I've been full-time as a writer since 1950. Now, I'd sold things before that.
I'd sold a magazine piece, I think as early as 1942. And I had something in my
magazine, a short, short story in a magazine section of a Minneapolis paper. And
I'd been in the Toronto Star Weekly, which was a magazine supplement. It went
along with the Toronto Star Journal. Star Journal? Ah, can't remember the name
of the newspaper. Dickson reveals more about his background and his literary
preferences. You see, the thing is that I always intended to be a writer. And
about for the first 30 years of my life, I was simply looking for the type of
thing I wanted to write. But I cut my teeth on poetry. If I had been born in the
late 19th century, I would have been at home because I would have done long
narrative poems like Idylls of the King. You know, Tennyson, and
things like this. As it is, we're in a non-poetic age. And I finally ended up
saying, well, to do what I want to do, I'm going to have to use the medieval
historical novel. And then simply because magazines were putting bread and
butter on the table, and I found out I like science fiction best. I like writing
science fiction best. I ended up doing essentially nothing but science fiction.
And as I did this, I came to realize the possibilities of that particular field
for what I wanted to do. What Dickson wanted to do was an ambitious undertaking,
to publish a series of 12 novels dealing with man's ethical evolution. He's
still working on the series, called The Childe Cycle. Some of the novels in it
are Necromancer, Dorsai!, and The Tactics of Mistake. We'll talk more with Gordon
Dickson next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Gordon Dickson has written highly popular
science fiction for over three decades, but during that time he's been most
concerned with one major vision, a series of novels called The Childe Cycle. The
series will be at least 12 novels long. The books will be set in the past, the
present, and the future, and they will deal with what Dickson calls the ethical
evolution of man. Some of the novels have already been written, Dorsai being
perhaps the best known of them. Dickson says that when he began writing science
fiction, he realized the possibilities that the field offered him to pursue his
vision. And of course what I want to do is now take in shape long since 20 years
ago as The Childe Cycle of Novels, which is, when it's done, will cover a
thousand years. There will be three historical novels, starting with one about
Sir John Hawkwood, who was an Englishman of the 13th century, who ended up as
Captain General of the military forces for Florence, Italy, and will end in the
23rd century with Childe, C-H-I-L-D-E, the novel from which the whole series
takes its name. And the whole series effectively, the stories don't
chronologically follow each other. They're connected thematically. And what they
represent is sort of a literary thematic argument, something that has never been
done before, actually, which argues, a philosophical point, in fact, it argues
that we're undergoing evolution right now. It's not physical evolution or mental
evolution. It's a, there's no really good word for it. You could call it
spiritual evolution, but that isn't right either. It's an ethical evolution.
We're, of necessity, we're evolving what I call a responsible human being. And
we're sort of halfway there from the time of the third, from the viewpoint of
the 13th century toward the 23rd. We're halfway to developing the responsible
human being. Dickson explains what he means by the responsible human being. If you
assume that, oh,
insanity is going to be brought under control unless civilization goes crash
within the next 50 or 100 years, if not a lot sooner, that is going to give you
a population of sane people. But even a population of sane people can have
individuals who, for their own purposes, are willing to destroy things. Now,
back in the days of the flint axe and the stone club, if a particular caveman
decided to run wild and start bopping people over the head, he could probably
kill two or three others before everybody ganged up on him and stopped him. And
that's escalated up to our time where somebody who knows how can set up a
laboratory in the basement and blow up a large-sized city or part of a state.
And you extrapolate the curve of destructive possibility and you see that
within, well, probably less than the 300 to 500 years I give us, you're going to
have a situation where any individual can destroy the whole race unless some
such sense of the responsibility is developed. And what the historical novels do
and the contemporary novels do is what a good, hard science fiction story does,
and that is they lay out the evidence of what we know and then extrapolate
forward from there, saying, all right, if this and this and this is so, and we
know it to be so, then doesn't this develop from it? You know, and if I'm wrong
in my hypothesis, point out where I'm wrong. And so the whole cycle becomes
essentially sort of one large science fiction story, even though it covers
historical, contemporary, and future novels. More with Gordon Dickson next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Actually, it isn't really.
The cycle is made with three archetypes, three human archetypes, one of which is
the warrior, one of which is the philosopher, and one of which is the faith
holder. Now, the historical novels show the warrior, the faith holder, and the
philosopher. However, in the person of people, we can look up in history books.
The 20th century will show them at work in our century. The future ones show
them in the projected and problematical future. But the warrior is only one of
three types, all of which is equally necessary. Now, the reason the emphasis on
the military is there is for two reasons. One is, this caught the eye of the
publishers, and they packaged the books as military-oriented books. And, in
fact, the ones that dealt with warrior types, like Donal Graeme, the first one,
Dorsai, where Donal Graeme is a warrior archetype, were legitimate to do it that
way. But then they began publishing all the things this way. That is part of it.
The other part of it is that since all the cycle must be sound, must be
watertight, is that the military elements in there are justified, are
logicalized. So I don't blame people for being led astray in this particular
fashion. But if they will look closely at the cycle, they will see it isn't
true. And about the only people I have any quarrel with are those who, without
reading things, simply make the assumption that this is a militaristically
oriented series of books.
When Dickson published Dorsai in 1959, he hadn't yet thought of the idea of a large
cycle in which that novel would only be a part. He says the idea of the cycle
came to him when he went to the Milford Science Fiction Conference in
Pennsylvania in 1960. And while I was up there, I hit one night, one asthmatic
night, when I was exhausted and I thought, well, maybe I'll sleep through. And
asthmatics tell them, of course you don't. I woke up an hour later and saw it.
People don't realize how to do it. It's a matter of getting breath in. It's a
matter of getting breath out. You swell up with air that you can't exhale. And
your adrenaline level goes off the top of the map. You're physically
incapacitated and the mind just gallops. I was way off in the woods,
effectively, and there was nothing to be done until dawn, at which time other
people would be up and they could drive me to the nearest doctor or clinic or
what have you. And so I had nothing to do but sit there for five hours and wait
for the sun to rise. And in that time, I worked out the pattern for this cycle
completely,
from soup to nuts with every book in its place, or rather every, I shouldn't say
every book, because the numbers of books have doubled because of the size of
what's being done. But it's a case of the original books more or less being
split down the middle, you see, because they're too big to publish, as it shows.
We'll continue talking with Gordon Dickson on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Science fiction author Gordon Dickson has
been working on his ambitious child cycle for over 20 years. When completed, the
cycle will encompass at least 12 novels and will describe the ethical evolution
of man. Dorsai, the first novel written in the series, though not the first
chronologically, was published in a serial and astounding magazine in 1959. We
asked Dickson if his overall plan is still based on a 12-novel series. Yes. The
original plan was for six novels.
Let me see. No, for nine novels. Pardon me. Three historical, three late in the
20th century, and three late in the future. Because I started on the future
length first, it was there I first discovered that each book was going to be too
big to get into one set of covers.
And I was up against the fact that publishers refused to print category fiction
in lengths of much more than 100,000 words at that time. Remember, the first big
book to come out actually was Frank Herbert's Dune, which antidates Dorsai, which
happened earlier, about, I think, four or six years, something like that. And
Dune was printed only because one editor in particular practically, well, laid
his job online and practically offered to shoot up the publishing house unless
they went after it. And they chewed their fingernails, you know, because there's
a great deal of money involved in printing a very large book. This is still the
case, even with paperbacks, even in paperback. It's very expensive to do a big
-type book. So these things had to be cut, pardon me, I mean they had to be
divided into smaller chunks. And the result was I ended up with three
historical, three contemporary, and six forward. Now, of that six forward, Final
Encyclopedia, at
1,400 pages, is so big that Childe, which should have been, see that Final
Encyclopedia is the penultimate novel. The last one, the ultimate one, is Childe.
And obviously, if Final Encyclopedia is 1,400, Childe would have run close to 2
,000 manuscript pages, which is far too big. So I've had to split that again. So
effectively, what we have now is not 12, but 13 novels.
What about the works that are set in the past, the historical novels? Will Dickson
stick to his original plan for a set of three? I think there's a pretty good
chance, except in the case of Hawkwood. And the problem with that is that Sir
John Hawkwood, the actual man, lived a very long time by medieval standards. An
astonishingly long time when you just stop to think that most of his adult life
was spent in hand-to-hand combat wearing armor.
He actually lived into his 70s. And he covered in that time what, by modern
standards, would have been three or four lifetimes. He starts out in Sible
-Hedingham, England, which is out in the boondocks of Essex in his time,
literally, when Essex was mainly forest. And ends up in Florence, Italy, which
at that time was the center of Western civilization. So effectively, he traveled
in subjective time about 150 to 180 years in terms of moving forward with the
pattern of civilization. More with Gordon Dickson next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Gordon Dickson has been turning out popular science fiction for over three decades.
During that time he's published around 40 novels and over 150 short stories.
And he's presently at work on his massive series The Childe Cycle, which will be around 13 novels when completed.
We ask Dickson if he gets tired of writing, and if it's hard for him to write.
Any art requires an instant amount
of work. And who hasn't said that the
definition of art was the taking of infinite things or words without a fact. But
the point is, the person doing it enjoys it or he doesn't do it.
I'm fascinated with the work I do.
You wonder, for example, how a concert pianist can practice five hours a day,
week after week, month after month, year after year. You think if you're a non
-piano player or if you had piano playing lessons pushed on you and didn't like
them when you were young, that this must be a self-imposed agony. It is. It's a
sheer pleasure for him to get things just right. And this, of course, is the
battle cry of the artist. It's to get things just right. When we asked Dickson if
he has to do a lot of rewriting, he alluded to a book he had just finished and
that should be published soon, the final encyclopedia. I write and rewrite and
rewrite and rewrite again. This last book, sections of it were
written once and barely touched again. Other sections were written in notable
times. I really couldn't tell you how many, ten or more, ten, fifteen times to
get it just right. I can't re-read anything I've written without picking up a
pencil and starting to correct and improve it. It's instinctive. Most writers
have this kind of reaction to a certain extent, although some rewrite more, some
rewrite less. There is a type of writer that doesn't rewrite but instead sits
and does nothing for a long time and then sits down and does it just the way he
or she wants it. And that possibly is the hardest work of all because it's all
being done in the end. I do it on paper. And of course, the fact that I use a
computer to write with Valdez makes it that much easier, makes it that much
faster. Dickson says that science fiction has developed over the years, a natural
progression from the hardware stories of the late 20s and early 30s. What was
printed in the late 1920s and the early 1930s went through a period of
development when John Gamble took over his founding and the concept of the hard
science fiction story and also something else, the idea story, which is
essentially a thematic science fiction story. It began with John in the 30s. And
that period has developed and gone on. They were originally hardware stories,
originally science fiction. And that's, it's gone from hard science to
essentially soft science. In other words, the subject, the scientific element,
has gone from physics and chemistry to, or rather went from physics and
chemistry into psychology and sociology and things like that. And with the
emergence in the 60s of the excellent crop of women writers who have almost
dominated the field since then, we've had the introduction of character into our
stories. We have become more, much more stories of human interest. As has been
pointed out and said, we've been exploring the inner universe as much as we've
been exploring the outer universe, perhaps more.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.